---
layout: post
title:  Cutting the benchtop to length
date:   2019-02-04
---

Today I completed two jobs: swept up the mountains of pine shavings produced so
far, and cut the benchtop to length!

I measured 1680mm from the end I'd already trimmed up, and cut a knife line
around the piece.

{% include figure.html source="benchtop-marking-cut.jpg" alt="benchtop cut knife line" caption="The knife line marking my cut" %}

I then clamped the piece to my sawhorses for the cut.  I took advantage of a
learned lesson from the previous cut here; with the sawhorses placed at the far
ends of the benchtop, the sawhorse at the cut end was in the way of where I
wanted to plant my feet while sawing.  This time I moved both sawhorses closer
in to the middle and used clamps for some additional stability while cutting
and end planing.

{% include figure.html source="benchtop-prep-cut.jpg" alt="benchtop cut prepared" caption="Preparing for the cut" %}

As I started the cut, I noticed there was a lot of vibration in part of the
bench, and then realised it was because of a big gap in the second join along
in the lamination.  Once my cut made it through the first two planks, those two
waste pieces fell right off, so it's clear that there was no join at all
holding planks 2 and 3 together down that end, and the gap extends a good way
down the benchtop.  Not enough for the whole join to fail easily, but certainly
enough for some noticeable flex.  I am not sure why the join didn't work here,
it could be that I didn't use enough glue, or didn't adequately smooth out the
surface, or maybe the pressure was not adaquate to counter the bowing in the
timber.  In any case, it's a disappointment, but I'm not sure that there is a
lot I can do about it now.

{% include figure.html source="benchtop-cut-complete.jpg" alt="benchtop cut complete" caption="The completed saw cut" %}

And then again, smoothed off the end grain in the cut with my block plane.  And
that's the benchtop pretty much done.  I **could** spend time trying to get the
top more flat -- it still has a bit of a dip in the middle -- but for the time
being I think I'll move on to other parts of the project.  There will always be
time for more refinement later, and I'm sure that the benchtop surface will
accumulate dings and scrapes as I go along.  The final piece weighs in at 21kg.

{% include figure.html source="benchtop-second-end.jpg" alt="benchtop end planed" caption="The completed benchtop piece" %}

Next stop: laminating the aprons!  Hopefully I've learned enough about
laminating at this point that I won't screw this next one up.  There's only one
way to find out.

## Lessons learned

- Getting the lamination right is really important.
- Use more glue.
