---
layout: post
title:  Fitting the third tenon
date:   2020-11-30
---


With both tenons on the top rail fitted, it was time to move on to the bottom
rail for the same leg frame.  As before, I laid out my tenon lines with the
mortise marking gauge.

{% include figure.html source="rail2-tenon-layout.jpg" alt="bottom rail tenon layout" caption="Tenon layout on the bottom rail" %}

Looking at the grain, I thought that one of the sides would split quite well,
but I was in for a bit of a surprise.  The split went exactly as I expected on
one side of the tenon, but when I went to split the other side, the split shot
deep into the wood.  I had to pull back and take a much shallower split, but
even that shallow split went perilously close to my gauge line.

The awkwardness of the grain meant that I needed to take a lot more time and a
lot of extra work with the chisel to get the tenon cheek down to the right
depth.

On the other side, I used a saw.  The practice with the first two tenons
definitely paid off here, I was able to cut quite close to my line, and
reasonably quickly and accurately.

Now the mortise that this tenon was going into was the [very first
mortise](/2020/10/21/mortise-skew.html) I cut on this project, which was very
badly skewed.  So before attempting to fit the tenon, I took some time to
refine the walls of this mortise. And boy did it need the refinement.  The
mortise was a real mess, it looked like I'd cut it with a rusty chainsaw.  To
be honest, I had my doubts about whether it would be able to form a decent
joint.

Once I was satisfied with the mortise walls, I started the process of smoothing
down the tenon cheeks, and fitting the tenon to the mortise.

{% include figure.html source="tenon3-fitting.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="Getting close ..." %}

In the end, the fit was actually better than I expected, given the quality of
the mortise.  It seemed to hold the tenon very firmly, and in fact, was perhaps
even a little too pinchy in the final inch or so.  I might come back and refine
a little more to relieve that, depending on how the fully assembled frame looks
when I get it into the clamps.

{% include figure.html source="tenon3-assembled.jpg" alt="third tenon assembled" caption="The fully assembled third tenon" %}

{% include figure.html source="tenon3-assembled-outside.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="The assembled joint, outside view" %}

{% include figure.html source="tenon3-assembled-inside.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="The assembled joint, inside view" %}

I did find that the rail piece was just a little bit wider than the mortise was
tall, which meant that in order to fit the tenon, I had to trim a small amount
off the top of it -- only about a millimetre.  I didn't really find a good
solution to doing that trim, the bench plane wasn't helpful and I had
difficulty getting my rebate plane to work with it.  I ended up doing it mainly
by eye with the chisel, which wasn't ideal.  I got there in the end though.

## Lessons learned

- The growth rings are not a reliable indication of grain direction!

## What's next

The other tenon on this bottom rail, which will be final tenon for this leg
frame assembly.
