---
layout: post
title:  Fitting the first tenon
date:   2020-11-27
---


Over the last three weeks I've been slowly working away at fitting my first
tenon.

First I needed to get all of my rail pieces cut to length and squared up.
There was a bit of twist in the rails but it wasn't too bad.

Next was laying out the tenons.  I allowed enough length on the tenons to
travel all the way through the mortise, plus another 12mm in addition to that.
This allows for the lower rail to protrude slightly.

I cut all four rails to the same length initially, even though the top rails
will end up being shorter, so that I could lay out all four tenons together,
ensuring that the inner distance between the legs will be consistent across the
rails.

{% include figure.html source="rails-tenon-layout.jpg" alt="rail tenon layout" caption="Laying out the tenons for the 4 rail pieces" %}

Then I got to work on cutting the first tenon on my left top rail.  That's when
I discovered that my tenon saw was not big enough to cut down a 102mm tenon
cheek!  So after going down as deeply as I could with the tenon saw, I finished
the cut with my normal hand saw.  That's not optimal, especially when trying to
keep the cutting edge of the saw perfectly level so that I don't cut into the
shoulder, but I did get there in the end.

{% include figure.html source="tenon1-initial-cuts.jpg" alt="tenon cuts" caption="First tenon: initial cuts" %}

You can see there is a troublesome knot in the wood travelling right across the
edge of the shoulder, and through the tenon itself.  More on that later.

After spending a bunch of time rebuilding my
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B_2a_FwjAgk](poor man's routing plane) and
then planing down the cheeks, I became frustrated with how hard it was to
smoothly plane through the knot.  So I decided to cut away the top section of
the tenon earlier than I otherwise would.  This did make my life easier on
trimming the tenon down to the right thickness, but on the downside, I had to
recreate my marking lines on the new surface, which surely was not as accurate
as the original lines.

Eventually I had shaved off enough material that the tenon was able to seat
into the mortise.  It was pretty smooth going until halfway down, where I
encountered the slight "kink" in the mortise where the two holes met.  This
really made it difficult to push the tenon through.  I was able to get the
tenon to go further by wailing on it with a hammer, but eventually decided this
was not healthy, and went back to the mortise to work on further smoothing down
the walls.

{% include figure.html source="tenon1-close.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="Almost there!" %}

After a lot of sweat and a lot of chisel work, the tenon finally went all the
way down without requiring violent force.

{% include figure.html source="tenon1-seated.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="First tenon: seated" %}

{% include figure.html source="tenon1-seated2.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="First tenon: outside view" %}

{% include figure.html source="tenon1-knot-breakout.jpg" alt="tenon fitting" caption="First tenon: inside view" %}

You can see in the last picture that while I was working on fitting the tenon,
that knot in the shoulder did indeed break out completely, leaving an unsightly
void in the joint.  I don't think this will have much impact on the strength of
the joint given how massive it is, but it does look pretty stupid.

Another problem I had was that one shoulder of the tenon met flush with the leg
while the other was not quite seated, there was a decent sized gap of around
1mm on one shoulder.  It took me quite a lot of head-scratching and measuring,
but eventually I worked out that this was mostly due to the inner face of the
leg not being square to the reference face.  So I went back to the plane and
worked on squaring up that face.  The final result still had a bit of a gap on
one shoulder, but much less than what I had originally.

So overall, not a pretty result, but I'm still very excited to have finally
completed the first major piece of joinery on this project!

Only seven more to go 😩

## Lessons learned

- I was a little too conservative on leaving the tenon fat with my initial saw
  cuts, which meant I had a lot of extra work to do in trimming it down to fit
  the mortise.  Next time I think I'll go a little closer to the line.
- There's no point trying to fit the tenon until the mortise walls are
  completely out of the way.
- Knots in pine are brittle and tend to break off.

## What's next

Cutting and fitting the tenon at the other end of the left top rail.
