---
layout: post
title:  Fitting the front apron
date:   2021-01-01
---


I completed cutting the leg recesses on the front apron and did a test fit of
both aprons to the leg frames.

{% include figure.html source="aprons-fitted.jpg" alt="aprons fitted" caption="Both aprons fitted to the leg frames" %}

Then I tested the benchtop out on the leg frames.  I found that there was a
noticable twist in the underside of the benchtop.  Checking with the winding
sticks, it was very difficult to detect but when the benchtop was sitting on
top of the leg frames, it had a definite wobble to it.

I planed down the twist until I thought it was at an acceptable level, and then
started preparation to glue the benchtop to the front apron.

{% include figure.html source="benchtop-fitted.jpg" alt="benchtop fitted" caption="Both aprons and the benchtop in position" %}

It's really exciting and satisfying to see the major pieces of the bench
assembled like this.  I'm *really* close to having a usable bench.

I bored the holes for my coach bolts with a bit-and-brace, which was way more
effective than I expected.  Even with my ancient, second-hand, poorly
maintained auger bit, I was able to bore through the ~110mm of material in
about a minute and with very little effort.

Then I tapped the coach bolts into place and attached washers and nuts, and
with the aprons secured, went on to glue the benchtop to the front apron.

I needed to remove the rear apron temporarily, so I hit the back end of the
coach bolts with a hammer to get them out.  Turns out this was not a great
idea, as it wrecked the end of the screw thread on the bolt, and I could no
longer thread the nut on.  After some messing around trying to get this to
work, I eventually decided to try filing down a taper on to the end of the
bolt, which I figured would remove the disrupted thread section and allow the
nut to bite on to the remaining "good" thread.  This approach did work but I
was kind of a pain in the butt.

## Lessons learned

Don't use a hammer on the end of a threaded bolt.  Use a piece of wood as a
packer between the hammer and the bolt to prevent damage to the thread.

## What's next

- Installing sunk hex head screws in the upper aprons.
- Cutting and fitting the wellboard.
